---
layout: post
title: Are student-friendly conferences worth it?
author: Tim
type: note
tags:
- conferences
---

Two recent posts by [Jeremy Fox](http://dynamicecology.wordpress.com/2012/08/03/advice-students-shouldnt-bother-with-student-friendly-conferences/) and [Zen Faulkes](http://neurodojo.blogspot.ca/2012/07/student-friendly.html) dealt with «students-friendly» conferences, and they do not seem too overtly enthusiastic about it, and prefer big meetings open to anyone. They have really valid points, which amount to the fact that there is no hierarchy in science, and anyone who wants to contribute a talk, or ask a question during a session, should feel free to do so. This is true. This is also not how things work.

When teaching, I'm always struggling to make students speak. And as far as I know, I'm not the only one in this situation. This is less of a problem with masters students, but undergrad are often terrible at participation. Why? Peer pressure! When you are afraid of (real or imagined) consequences of being wrong, i.e. asking a «bad» question, or saying something «stupid» (quoted to say  that, except in some extremely pathological cases, there are no bad questions or stupid remarks), you tend to stay silent. This is only in the classroom context, so imagine the situation when you are an undergrad student, in a room full of big-shot professors that you respect for their work. Until you have a good enough guess on which side of the «Wow that young fellow is smart!» / «Is he retarded?» line you will fall, you tend to stay silent.

To some extent, giving a talk is even worse. Some people are really shy, and tend to be overly impressed when more than two people stare at them. These can be really brilliant people, with exciting data, and good ideas about their field. But they will not carry this brilliance across because being looked at paralyze them. I have no problem talking in front of peoples. I used to play the violin in a few orchestras, and a string quartet, since I was 12, so being looked at while performing is not something that impresses me. When I gave my first talk in an international meeting, in the last year of my master, I was not really stressed. In his blog, [Jeremy Fox says he was](http://dynamicecology.wordpress.com/2012/08/03/advice-students-shouldnt-bother-with-student-friendly-conferences/), and I've heard people describe their first ESA talk as [out of body experiences](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Out-of-body_experience). So there are three types of people: those who usually don't stress (I realize how lucky I am to be part of them), thos who do but don't show it, and those who do but are not able to overcome it.

What's with students-friendly conferences, you ask? Training. It's true that there is no hostily toward students in most scientific meetings, but it does not means that the environment of a conference cannot be perceived as _hostile_ or _unsafe_ by some. It can be a really stressful experience to be left to yourself in this context, and there is a big role for smaller, overtly student-friendly meetings, to provide a safer space for which to devleop your own presenting style. Everyone should be entitled to its own rythm of progression, and if someone needs a few stepping stones between presenting to five people and giving at talk at the ESA, there should be meetings of various sizes to allow it. If we say that these student-friendly meetings are useless, we take the risk of having only showmen and people with high confidence presenting, and science should not be about social skills. It's about your ability to make sense of the world around you; the ability to communicate through others should be trained, and small meetings for students are one of the best possible ways to do so.

There are also other upsides to _organizing_ these smaller meetings. I've been part of the organization committe of two or three so far, and I'm working on another one. It's a good experience. You get to see what it takes to organize a scientific event, ranging from the most fundamental questions (what kind of science do we want to do), to the most applied (Crap, all the hotels are full, where are we going to put our faculty speakers? And why are plane tickets so expensive, we'll have to cut on the beer!). I think it's part of the training of a functioning member of the academia. As a matter of fact, organizing a scientific event was one way to get some of the credits required to defend your thesis in my graduate school.

Finally, the with which I disagree the must, is the fact that «student-friendly» equates local and cheap. It may be that should you organize a one day symposium for people in your institution, it can be local, and appear cheap, but I think it's clear for everyone involved that you are not organizing a large scientific events. You put people together to discuss science, and _have fun_. [EMPSEB](http://www.empseb18.com/Start/Home.html) is a massive success in that regard, as it scores really high on the «good science» and «bad hangovers» axes. And this is the poster-child of student friendly events, with paper discussions which I still remember vividly, because they were extremely stimulating.

To conclude, I think we should not look down on student-friendly meetings. They provide a really good training opportunity, both for the people talikng that are given the opportunity to gain confidence, and for the people organizing them. And it is not because they are meant for students that the science will be bad, or the discussions unstimulating. It's a matter of finding the good people (faculties) to catalyze it, and it can be an extremely fun couple of days.
