---
layout: post
title: Models are useless. Real ecologists should move on.
author: Tim
type: note
tags:
- ecological theory
- models
- equations
---

I'm spending more and more of my time doing theory related thing. Data analysis, model, drawing conceptual figures to make it seem like I have deep ideas about nature, life, and everything. Yet I *love* ecology, biology, and the complexity of natural systems. At this point, I'm sure most of you are familiar with the recent paper by [Fawcett & Higginson in *PNAS*](http://www.pnas.org/content/early/2012/06/22/1205259109.abstract) - they conclude that the more equations are in a biology paper, the more its relative number of citation decreases. This result is equal part tragic and unsurprizing, and upon publication, the entire community of empiricists adressed a gigantic *«Told you so»* to the theoreticians. What I was not aware of until [Philippe](http://phdp.github.com/) sent it to me this morning is a critique of this paper published on F1000 (mostly because I didn't cared really much for that paper, and because I think the F1000 system is outdated, archaic, and deserves to be replaced by an open platform, so I don't read it).

The [text](http://f1000.com/717597856) (behind a paywall), written by [Ferdinando Boero](http://f1000.com/thefaculty/member/5244821872453101) is the most disappointing, infuriating thing I've read this week (but it's only monday morning here, so you never know...). As I'm quite sure it's heavily protected by copyright, [I'll only reproduce the most relevant excerpts here](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fair_use). But go read it as soon as you have a chance. I'll sum it up for you beforehand: the only good ecology is autecology. This good ecology is a science of example so devoid of general laws that any mathematical approach is a waste of time, and cannot be considered serious biological science (but it can be sub-par mathematics). Throw away the classical [Lawton](http://www.jstor.org/discover/10.2307/3546712?uid=3739464&uid=2129&uid=2&uid=70&uid=3737720&uid=4&sid=21101143468397) paper, and throw away the recent and brilliant essay by [Vellend](http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20565040).

The text starts with the following gem, «*Mathematical models may not present a true representation of what it is they are trying to study*», which you may recognize as the first half of the famous George Box quote, «*Essentially, all models are wrong, but some are useful*». I can go in the details of this sentence for hours, but I'll just point out that models *try* to study, whereby it is implied they ultimately fail. And so the tone of the review is set. Modelling papers are not cited because real biologists and ecologists know better than to pay any attention to this second-class science. Why? Because models are simplified, and according to Boero, overly so. Let me quote:

> Biodiversity is just a handful of species; predation and competition are not accurate at all. Parasitism is usually absent; species are just adults, and there are no life cycles and life histories. The mathematics is beautiful, but the natural history is not.

I'm not sure what to do with this sentence. Models in ecology are not just Lotka-Volterra, and even if it were, it was proven times and times again that you can do kick-ass science with slight variations it (and by you, I mean mostly [Peter Abrams](http://www.eeb.utoronto.ca/people/d-faculty/abrams.htm)). Go open a basic textbook in modelling, like [Otto & Day](http://press.princeton.edu/titles/8458.html), or even teaching material like [Gillman](http://www.amazon.co.uk/Introduction-Mathematical-Evolution-Ecological-Concepts/dp/140517515X). Just skim through the table of contents, and it will be clear that the idea that models lack parasitism, or life cycles, or life histories, is unsubstantiated.

Boero continues by illustrating its point, with the example of why models of phytoplankton dynamics are wrong.

> I can find a beautiful correlation between nutrient availability and primary production, but does phytoplankton come out from nutrients? The presence of benthic resting stages developing then in planktonic organisms is rarely, if ever, introduced in equations describing plankton production. Phytoplankton comes out from nutrients! I do not have much interest in reading a paper that is based on these premises.

Funny he mentions it, though, because I have the feeling that [Ecological Stochiometry](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Ecological_stoichiometry) gained equally from the empirical work of the likes of Redfield, and the theory which was developped later by people like Tilman, Pacala, and so on. It's hard for me not to be under the impression that most of this critique of theory is based on the fact that models representing ecological systems that Boero likes are not realistic enough for its taste. Besides, who cares about models? Darwin himself told us that «*we have better evidence on this subject than mere theoretical calculations, namely, the numerous recorded cases of the astonishingly rapid increase of various animals in a state of nature, when circumstances have been favourable to them for two or three following seasons*». But what is the generality in these observations? How do you expand them to predict?

Reading this, I had the impression that ecology should not go beyond natural history. We should stick to the word of Saint-Charles. This orthodoxy is unbearable, not only because it is insulting to people who made ecology advance through the integration of theory and data (and if you want to read something insightful about this merging, go read what [Simon Levin](http://rsfs.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/2/2/141.full) has to say about it), but because it is dangerous. Ecology needs to be predictive. We have to go out of the ivory tower and [address real world problems](http://www.innge.net/?q=node/11). We have to [find solutions](http://blogs.plos.org/toothandclaw/2012/08/09/to-sum-up-we-are-screwed-questions/), and it is not by being contempt with just counting animals over time and trying to describe it the best we can that we'll be in a position to do it. We'll need to find generality. We'll need predictive tools, and models.

And of course no [troll](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Troll_%28Internet%29) will be complete with the modern day Godwin-point equivalent: a reference to the economic crisis. Wait, what? Yes, you read that well:

> The future of non-linear, complex systems cannot be predicted with equations. Economists tried, and we see the result; very nice economic equations that lead to disaster in the real world.

Beware of theoreticians, lest we trigger another catastrophe. This is populism in its worse form. This comes  from a paragraph in which Boero essentially claims that *ecological modelling is an epistemological mistake*. There are so many wrong things in equating ecological modelling to the financial crisis that my copy of Descartes works spontaneously combusted when I read this paragraph out loud. So what is the message of this text?

>So, yes, biologists do not like formula-filled papers dealing with biology. **But maybe those who write these papers do not like biology so much**. They want to adapt biology to their mathematics, but it should be the other way around.

Oh, I see. This was not an informative review of an interesting paper. This was a bigot, hatred-filled, uninformed rant about theory. If I had paid *F1000* moneyto read this, I would have felt ripped off. There was so many potential to discuss the abusive and useful simplification of some common modeling frameworks. There was the opportunity to discuss how the pedagogy of modelling papers can be improved to better reach out to empiricists. There was, to say it, the potential for something interesting, rather than something infuriating. The last paragraph is the worse attack on modelling I've read in a long time, and the worse thing is that there is no constructive side to it. The only message is: to do better science, stop wasting your time with theory, and do some real work like your elders used to do. This is frankly depressing. One thing is sure, though. In three weeks, I'll give an introductory class on population and community dynamics. The *PNAS* paper and this critique will definitely be included in the reading material. I'll let the students discuss it, and I'll try to do a summary here. I can wait to see which side they'll pick...

As an amusing side-note, I've been reading through the [F1000 recommandations](http://f1000.com/3425962) for the Vellend paper I mentionned in the second paragraph. Ferdinando Boero wrote one, rating it 6 (recommended), and concluded it with «*I strongly advise all ecologists to read \[The Origin of the Species\] very carefully. The explanation of the process of evolution it provides needed much revision (there is no genetics), but the ecology is first class! **And it also needs almost no amendments even today**. The tangled bank (the first description of a community) is a mess, so what? This is the world we live in. *». I rest my case.
