---
layout: post
title: Can phage increase bacterial growth?
author: Tim
type: paper
tags:
- phages
- bacteria
- stress response
---

In the early days of my PhD (I probably started a week or two before that), I attended the *BRIDGES* workshop in [Blanes](http://www.ceab.csic.es/). The goal of this workshop was to bring together microbial ecologists and general ecologists. Back in Montpellier, Mike Hochberg, Tom Bell and I discussed the classical results of [*Daphnia* changing their behavior when exposed to predators](http://plankt.oxfordjournals.org/content/17/8/1661.short), and wondered if we can get this cool result with bacteria and phages. Why? Because we were working on that system, and I was supposed to focus on stress responses (then I joined the dark side, and started doing ecology-related stuff).

We've been doing a lot of tests, including mechanical massaging of the bacteria with super-small silicate beads to see if it changed their growth rate. There was, actually, a rational discussion leading to «Yes, massaging bacteria with microscopic beads to find out if they behave like *Daphnias* exposed to predators is a sound scientific idea». We had to order the beads from an aeronautic company. The first vesion of the paper was rejected with *extreme* prejudice by the referees, but we were still confident in the surprizing effect we described: when exposed to bacteriophages, bacteria grow faster than alone. Which was cool, because it means like something similar to what Tim Clutton-Brock called [terminal investment](http://www.jstor.org/stable/2461034) was acting in bacteria. In short: when the chance of surviving is low because of predators, the best strategy is to put all your eggs in the reproductive basket. Can organisms as small as bacteria show this much foresight?

We decided to start the experiment over, and desactivated phages with UV exposure. It was greatly simplified by the fact that our home-made primer to detect the bacteria also amplified a 250 bp region on the phage genome­, showing that (i) molecular biology is full of surprizes, and (ii) [lucky is better than good](http://abstrusegoose.com/494). When bacteria were exposed to this mix, they grew faster (twice faster, to be precise, which is no small difference), but at the cost of individual cell size. Because they wait less between two division events, each bacterial cell decreases its size, which clearly goes in the sense of [the needs of the many outweighing the needs of the few](http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0084726/quotes) (because how much cooler would it have been if *terminal investment* had been called *The Wrath of Kahn effect*?). The effects almost disappeared 4 days after the first contact with the phages (which, in the case of bacteria, is already an evolutionary timescale), so it kind of suggests a plastic, transient response. It took us an incredibly high number of extremely frustrating trials to get it right (I'd say we had to do it about 10 times before we were sure), it cost me a few nights of lab work in the first trials, but the result is so cool that it was worth it.

Anyway, [the paper is now available on F1000 Research](http://f1000research.com/articles/terminal-investment-induced-by-a-bacteriophage-in-a-rhizosphere-bacterium/), and the data are available on FigShare. Obviously there are more questions asked than answered by this paper. Do bacteria become smaller to avoid contact with phages? We found no really significant effect. Why do the growth rate increases, is this some form of altruism? What are the evolutionary implications of this response? Is it defense by the bacteria, or manipulation by the phage? Quoting from any book of algebra ever written, the answers are «left as an exercise to the reader».