---
title: Codelust
author: Tim
type: note
layout: post
tags:
- programming
---

**Wanderlust** *(noun)*: a strong desire to travel.

**Codelust** *(noun)*: a strong desire to code rather than actually work, and how you can use it for good.

I'm lucky. I have stacks of datasets on my laptop, and good ecological
questions to ask, and (hopefully) that will result in a few papers. But that's
not *fun*. I know what I have to do, how I have to do it, and I'm mostly
re-using existing tools. So over the last month or so, I've been consumed by
*codelust*, a strong desire to open a text editor, and write a program that
does something I've never done before.

At first sight, it's a complete waste of time. But I've noticed that it's
better to let myself take one hour or two a few days a week, than fight against
the need to do new stuff just for the sake of it, and for a few reasons.

First, it's a good way not to grow tired of your current projects. There are
times when you can't see anymore of a particular dataset or paper for the day,
and it's better to sharpen your computing skills than roam around the
office trying to find other bored people to socialize with (at least,
it's more productive in the long term). That's a good way to keep
your sanity. I've always been a big fan of Google's [20% time
rule][goog], that states that 20% of your time should be spent on
something *not* directly related to what you're supposed to be. The
precise amount of time dedicated to goofing around will vary. but the
general idea is that you will eventually use this time to do new,
creative things, and you will eventually have a long-term benefit.

Second, episodes of codelust are good times to try *something new*. I'm not
talking about creating something new from a scientific point of view (though
we'll get to that), but more of trying a new technique, library, or
something like that. It recently led me to replace `tsv` by `json` as the
output format for a model I'm working on. I've learnt a great deal, and
identified new areas for improvement. This will probably help me save time in
other projects, and now I have one more tool in my toolbox.

Additionaly, codelust (if you're the theory type) is a good way to get
innovative projects started. What happpens if I change this model in this way?
How does the relationship between these and these outputs reacts to another
factor? With most simple, canonical ecological models, simple questions are
easy to explore. If you're lucky (failing that, you'll have to be smart), you
can stumble upon an interesting result that is worthy of being expanded into
a "real" paper. Try not to grow bored of *this* paper and engage in more
codelusting, that would probably disprove the point I just made...

And as a final point, codelust will keep you sharp. It's easy to write one
R package and use it for a while. Forcing yourself to write new code, using new
methods, every once in a while, will keep you up to date, increase the range of
situations you've already covered, and give you a more solid experience. 

[goog]: http://www.wisebread.com/why-you-should-follow-googles-20-rule
