---
layout: post
author: Tim
byline: Hi. Have you thought about not being a sexist pig?
title: Hey Matt
tags: sexism
---

Hey [Matt][matt],

Hi. I'm Tim. I do some science. Some is good. Today, I managed to screw up
one calculation, but I compensated by writing a paragraph for a paper that
I think makes a nice compelling argument for some thing that may interest a
few of my colleagues. This does not amount to much, since you contributed to
landing a robot on a comet. But in terms of scientific achievement, I still
come up way ahead today; and so do many, many other scientists over the world.

Want to know why? How is that possible? Simple. We managed not to alienate
and objectify our female colleagues today.

I know, that's crazy, right? Want to know how? We woke up this morning, and
thought, *Hey, perhaps I should [dress like an asshole today][shirt]*. Then
we realized that it would be ridiculous, and that no one in their right mind
would do so.

See, there are these people called *women*. Look on your shirt -- they're
like that, but dressed. They do science, too. In fact they do most things as
well as most of us. And they deserve every bit of our admiration, because boy
are we giving them a hard time. We might not even realize it; that's the way
being a white middle-class 30-something-or-so male works. The academic life
is though with them. You know how though academia is for all of us? Well
that's one of the point where women are not like us: for them, it's worse.

So anyway, that shirt. It sends a message. *Hi, I'm Matt Taylor, and I
like my women naked*. This is the message you chose for your day under the
limelight. Or did you got women and potted plants confused? Distasteful shirts
the world over have plants patterns, and these are usually naked in that
clothes on a plant makes no sense. It's OK to objectify potted plants. If you
have some sort of impairment that results in you mixing up shapes, I apologize.

Seriously, that shirt. It costed, what, 25 bucks? Do you realize that a 25$
piece of clothing made *scientists* are getting angry enough to talk about it
more about the fact that you contributed to landing a spacecraft on, holly
shit, a comet? There is no prefix in the international system to measure
how hard you have to screw up to *make scientists care less about one of the
biggest achievements of science than about the clothes you wear*. I humbly
suggest the Taylor: a measure of how much your douchebaggery prevents people
from appreciating your scientific achievements.

But I ought to thank you. Yeah! Because your shirt allowed to reveal something
important and positive about scientists. We don't tolerate this shit. A lot
of us, a majority perhaps, are working everyday to make science a welcoming
place, where everyone is allowed to be different, and no one is allowed to
discriminate or objectify. This involves a lot of positive things. Hiring
more women, more minorities. Being sensitive to cultural differences, and the
fact that the system is inherently harder on some. Giving equal opportunity
to all. Judging people by what they bring to the field, not by whether or not
you'd "hit that". Not being an all-around terrible person. Easy things. But
as you've discovered, there is a dark side too. If you screw up, and if you
unmake all of the work that we do day by day, you'll take shit. We'll make
sure that people hear that we disagree with that.

That shirt. It's so bad that instead of saying *how cool is it that we
landed a spacecraft on a comet*, we're saying to our female colleagues *I'm
sorry you have to deal with sexist assholes like Matt Taylor all the time,
how can I help*. You're supposed to make science *sexy*, not *sexist*. You
though that would not be rocket science -- that's apparently way harder.

Cheers,   
Tim

[matt]: http://rosetta.jpl.nasa.gov/matt-taylor
[shirt]: http://www.businessinsider.com.au/rosetta-scientist-matt-taylor-wore-sexist-shirt-for-philae-launch-2014-11
